No, probably not, it's not
something I think about,
but and that's why I think that
maybe it's easy for someone to
kind of get trapped
in that kind of situation
because no one expects it to
happen to them.
"The verbal stuff started off
first.
He could make me feel very
stupid.
There was a combination of
physical, mental, emotional
abuse.
I really became isolated at
home.
She lost control and she flew at
me and threw me against the wall
and, um, and undid my pants, and
then I told her to stop.
My self worth was weighed on
what he had materially and what
I had,
so because he had more material
assets than I did
automatically to him he thought
he was a better person than I
was."
Abuse in peer relationships can
happen to anyone
regardless of age, race, class,
or sexual orientation - it
doesn't discriminate.
Recognizing the signs of abuse
can be difficult
because they're often subtle and
can be mistaken as attention or
even affection.
The women you are about to hear
from today are strong women
and they are still dealing with
their own experiences of abuse.
They have decided to speak out
with their truths to help you
discover yours.
"When I started going out with
him, first he was very sensitive
and there was times when I would
just become really depressed
and he would be really sensitive
about it.
But then he would also have, it
was almost like, well,
'I can't cater to you because I
have problems too ok, so excuse
me if I let it out on you.'
That was his philosophy."
"Initially when we first got
together things were amazing,
I never felt so cared for so
loved, you know she was
incredible,
I can't ever remember being that
happy."
"I really liked him and he fit
like a lot of qualifications
that women want for men, like:
he's got a car, and he's really
smart and he's in a good school
and he's got a good job and he's
really understanding and he's
pro-feminist sometimes
and what more could I ask for,
you know?
And so all those things kind of
made me not want to see the
messed up stuff."
"He had girlfriends, or other
girls he was involved with,
and I saw how he was treating
them and I would tell him you
know,
you can't talk to her like that
you can't, you know, why are you
treating her like that?
I would never be with somebody
like that, never,
but by hanging around him he
drew me right in and I ended up
with him
and I ended up getting treated
just like those other girls."
"It was hard, because you're
just scared that he might just
blow up at you, I guess,
and do something and hit you or
just yell at you,
because his words were enough to
just be like "ok".
There are many different forms
of abuse such as:
Financial, spiritual, physical,
sexual, social, and emotional
and verbal.
It doesn't progress from one
form to the other,
rather it can occur at any point
within a relationship and each
form can be equally as damaging.
"Well there was the verbal
abuse:
I'm a fat pig, I'm a loser, I'm
no good, no body else would want
me, I'm lucky to have him.
Just the basic name-calling.
Then there was the physical
abuse:
punched, slapped, he actually
stabbed me with a fork.
The name calling was worse, um,
I didn't like that, it made me
feel really, I don't know,
sad all the time."
".And the physical, sometimes
the physical stuff would come
first
and then the verbal and then
sometimes the other way around,
and sometimes both at the same
time,
but a lot of times the words
were irrational unless they were
you know, brief sentences like,
you know, nobody else would go
out with you, who would go out
with you, um, you know,
no one else is gonna find you
attractive,
no one else would put up with
you - that's one I really - no
one else would put up with you."
"It was usually over money, you
know, he wasn't working or he
would find a bit of a job,
and he would just go drinking
and so there would be a lot of
shouting and uh, pushing.
Then eventually punching,
kicking.
One time he just nailed me
square right in the face and I
went down
and I just went like this to
cover myself
because I thought if I fight
back he's stronger than me it's
gonna get worse."
"There was a lot of emotional
abuse
because he knew about every
relationship I had beforehand
and every form of abuse I
experienced and he kind of used
it to his advantage
and he liked to say things that
would make me just feel bad,
make me feel like those things
were just, you know, I deserved
those things,
and he would push me or put his
fist up to me and all kinds of
things of that nature.
But I remember the one time he
kicked me.
He convinced me, he convinced
himself and he convinced me so
well that it never happened."
"From the verbal, from the
cutting down to your nothing, to
um,
and when I defended myself
that's when the physical stuff
came into play."
"It wasn't like he got angry at
any switch and turn,
but we were very hot-tempered
when we did get angry.
I'm a very emotional, passionate
person so I yell and scream too,
but he always had to outdo me so
it was more yelling and
screaming.
Then, for him, it would turn
into throwing something and then
it would just escalate
into pushing me against the wall
he pushed me against, uh, we
were in his parents house once
and he pushed me against the
wall and it made a huge hole
in the wall,
like from here to the bottom, a
huge hole in the wall."
"You know the whole, the
jealousy thing, the
possessiveness.
Basically telling me how to
dress telling me how to... what
looks, who to hang around even.
Finding fault with my family all
over the place.
I just felt so vulnerable, she
also on numerous occasions, kept
me very isolated too,
by threatening to tell people -
I hadn't come out to everyone at
that time.
There were a few people that
knew.
And that was one thing that she
was constantly using to sort of
keep me away from people;
threatening that if I broke up
with her, you know, that she
would tell people."
"When he drinks he can get very
violent and I wasn't allowed to
go anywhere, talk to anybody.
I just felt alone.
He could take off for two weeks
three weeks and I couldn't go
anywhere.
I had two kids to take care of
and it was just, I mean, it was
just like emotional abuse."
"Oh ya, the isolation part with
the phone, who you talking to
and um,
if I said hello to a guy
automatically I'm sleeping with
him.
Even if I look at a guy, it
became a big problem with the
physical
with the strangling and the
choking.
You know, you're a piece of shit
no decent woman would be looking
at another man.
When I wasn't making my own
money anymore, he sort of had me
in his corner,
and even to go grocery shopping
it would be like five dollars to
get something for dinner.
And I would be so ashamed
sometimes to ask for more
because I knew what I was prior
to meeting him
and I'm like I can't let him see
me like this on my,
but he's the one who put me
there so he knew I was there,
but by me asking him for money
would be admitting that I'm
actually on my knees here."
"Whenever we had a fight,
whenever something happened,
whenever something went wrong it
was like my fault that it
happened.
And he always made me feel like
I was to blame for it,
so I always felt really guilty
for it."
"There were times when I left
the relationship and had a week
or a few weeks of time to myself
and she would always come after
me.
She would show up at my house
usually late at night after she
had been out somewhere else
and she'd end up banging at my
door and yelling for me to open
the door to let her in
and I was always afraid to let
her in,
there were times I did let her
in because I wanted the yelling
to stop."
"My husband was a very
aggressive man.
It was an arranged marriage and
after a few months they start
abusing me
like they start beating, verbal
abuse, emotionally.
I was so much disturbed.
I was assaulted so badly and
beaten so badly.
Although I am a well educated
lady I was not allowed to talk
to any other my neighbours
or my friends because it was a
matter of honour,
they said no you are not allowed
to talk and I always remained at
home -
they kept me in a basement."
"He would call me a whore.
As a joke sometimes, which I
didn't think was funny,
obviously,
I mean I'm someone that was
raped before and molested
and he knew these things he knew
that my confidence was low
when it came to how I felt about
myself and he would just,
it's almost like he played on it
because it made me weaker than
he was and he was just like,
he would make fun of me, like,
the way I look and he'd make me
feel really conscious
about the way I looked and
really cautious and just
I don't know.  He made me feel
like a whore,
more so than almost anybody."
If we look closely at abusive
relationships a general cycle
emerges.
After an episode of abuse, the
abuser generally:
gives excuses or expresses guilt
and promises to never do it
again.
That's followed by a period
where everything might seem like
things are getting better.
Well, once the routine returns
to a relationship, tensions
build
and the smallest little thing
might trigger more abuse.
Every abusive relationship has
its own pattern  -
a pattern that can repeat itself
within the span of weeks, days
or even hours.
While the cycle of abuse might
be different in every
relationship,
its effects are the same.
"It's so hard to actually walk
away from someone you feel like
there's no other person for you.
That's what they do they make
you feel like they only love
you,
you know what I mean, no one
else is gonna love you and you
actually believe it.
You tend to actually believe
what they say, and that's how it
starts and they have you."
"We used to fight, I don't know,
I guess we used to fight a lot.
But it wouldn't always end up in
a physical violent thing,
sometimes it would just be
manipulative like,
he's gonna pretend to leave he
throws back the key to the
apartment
and doesn't talk to me for two
days and is such a drama queen
about it
and totally cuts me off, totally
doesn't give me and himself, any
room to communicate, you know?
So it was like, it was emotional
torture at that time because I
thought,
"Oh my God, it's over, I love
him so much I'm so sorry."
And it just kinda it was like he
knew that I would in that two
days be so self-loathing,
that I would want to do anything
I could to get him back, to be
with him, you know?
So sometimes he wouldn't even
have to use violence.
I mean, it varied.
The violence in our relationship
it went up and down
it was always there from the
very beginning, it was there, in
an extreme way;
to the very end it was there, in
an extreme way."
"You know everything would be
going along what felt like
everything was fine
and the next thing I knew, you
know, I'd get a call from a
friend or someone would,
you know, come by and uh, that
would trigger a reaction.
Um, sometimes you know, when I'd
talk to her about this she says
oh no you don't see your friends
enough,
and she would do the total
reverse.
It seemed like she was
encouraging it so I'd have
friends over
and she would make a huge scene,
my friends would get
uncomfortable and leave.
We were in a very remote area,
and there wasn't even police
that I could call when I needed
them.
Very often they'd only be in
town for a couple of days a
week,
um, so it was really quite a
frightening situation."
"It's usually after I get hurt
and if there's blood or
something.
That's when like if I get cut,
that's when I see the tender
side of him because,
I don't know why that always
happened.
And it's usually ok until the
wound starts to heal up and the
cycle would repeat,
it would start all over again."
"He would go away and I wouldn't
see him and expect to come back
and  everything's ok and I never
had a life, I didn't go
anywhere.
I couldn't do anything.
And I said at that time it
doesn't make any sense to stay
in the relationship,
there is nothing, there's no
communication there's no
anything.
And those are signs that if I
stay with this man it's going to
be hell after."
"There were times when he could
build my confidence, like to the
highest point,
and I'd appreciate it and give
us 10 minutes, and apparently my
big mouth,
and I would just lose it, if it
gets really bad, like and if I'm
standing too close,
then he'll like push me and I
remember when he pushed me he
was just like,
"it's just a reflex, you know,
you can't go up in someone's
face
and expect them to be happy with
you there."
And I was like, "ya but, have we
met, like why would you push me"
and then afterwards I was just
really, really uncomfortable
and scared and of course that's
the time when he's an angel."
Being trapped in a cycle of
abuse creates fear, and feelings
of hopelessness -
feelings that you can't leave
the relationship,
that there is nowhere else to
go,
that nobody will understand and
that you don't deserve better.
"Fear definitely kept me there,
fear of being outed,
fear of having my private life
turn into something public;
fear of having the police
involved, fear of having my
family find out
fear for my life, really."
"My first son, his first child.
I was going to get a job, I had
a job interview and he was
supposed to baby sit the baby
and he didn't show up to baby
sit and he knew I had a job
interview.
However, after I ended up taking
my son to the interview
and after the interview I went
looking for him at one of his
houses.
However, I found him and I went
inside and I started pointing
out what he did,
telling him what he did.
You know like, you had, you told
me you were gonna look after the
baby,
where were you I ended up having
to take him with me.
He dragged me outside on the
lawn and started choking me.
He punched me in the stomach,
like he punched the wind out of
me.
But it was the choking, and he
choked me several times before
to the point of passing out,
but this time my son was
standing there and he was two
years old,
like standing on the step
looking at what was happening
outside on the lawn
in front of the house and what
went through my head was
if I'm gonna die I can't die in
front of my son.
You know, that would be the last
thing he saw the last image he
had of me.
And after six years of putting
up with the verbal and the
physical stuff
just that look on my son's face
at that point in time,
I just said no I can't, i can't,
I cannot live like this anymore
it's just not right.
And it's not me alone now in
this cycle, my son is in it now
and I got up and ran next door
and I called the police from
next door."
"He continued to drink and he
got violent,
and he tried to strangle me on
the kitchen floor.
And actually I think the thing
that saved me that day was my
daughter screaming in the next
room.
We had the baby gate up but it
was her shrill that he released
his hands around from my throat.
So I ran to get her and I left.
I was living here at the time in
Toronto and I went back to
Manitoba."
"So, the last time she sexually
assaulted me, she lost control
and she flew at me and threw me
against a wall and um, undid my
pants
and then I told her to stop, and
threw me on the bed and then she
had sex with me.
And then I ended up crying and
she ended up acting
like she didn't think that there
was any big deal,
except she did point out that I
seemed to be more upset than
usual,
which was kind of crazy and
silly.
But I was really frightened
because I had never seen her get
that violent before."
There are many early signs that
can indicate whether your
partner will be abusive or not,
it doesn't just happen
overnight.
The most telling indicator is
that feeling that you get when
something isn't quite right -
and if it doesn't feel right, it
probably isn't.
Setting boundaries for yourself
early in a relationship
can let you know if something
isn't right -
knowing what you want in a
relationship,
how you want to be treated and
that you deserve dignity and
respect.
Remember, being abused is
never your fault.
It was when he started
threatening me,
and just calling me, and yelling
at me on my answering machine,
and calling me names on my
answering machine.
It's when I felt real fear, is
when I said 'ok, you gotta do
something.'
"You really need to hear you
don't deserve this.
You really need to hear that you
didn't do anything to make this
happen
because you really think that if
you just changed that one thing
that things would have been
different but they wouldn't have
because that's unfortunately,
sadly, that's who he is.  That's
how he deals with situations."
"It's hard because you can't
tell someone to get out, it has
to be,
um, it has to be their decision.
I mean, you can talk to them and
tell them that they don't
deserve that treatment,
there is ways out of it if
they're ready to leave.
I know it's a hard situation
when you don't have nothing,
but, I mean, there's shelter's
like this that offer you the
support you need
and a safe place to go for
yourself and if you have
children."
If you find yourself at any
stage of an abusive relationship
there are ways to break the
cycle:
First, acknowledge the abuse,
name it for what it is;
look at your options, evaluate
your resources; choose the one
that's right for you.
Once you've made the choice,
make a plan and follow it
through.
Eventually it will bring you one
step closer to the healing you
need
and further away from the abuse.
"My roommate at the time had
witnessed our entire
relationship,
almost our entire relationship
especially the fights, right,
'cause that was the private the
only private times in our
apartment
and stuff when my roommate was
there and she knew about
everything
so I couldn't lie to her, I
couldn't hide it.
I couldn't hide me crying, I
couldn't hide bruises...
because she was there, you know,
and she saw it and she helped me
realize just talking and talking
and talking about it, making me
talk about it -
because she saw it, she had to
ask me what happened,
"what was the real reason, what
were you fighting about I didn't
hear everything, what went on."
You know, and then having to
out-loud say it to her,
it was like I couldn't lie
anymore to myself about it, you
know?"
"I'd been thinking about it for
a while,
and I'd looked into ways of
trying to get out of it like,
without him knowing where I was
because I have his child and
what not - him hunting me down.
I spoke with a worker and he
gave me a book on shelters
if I absolutely needed to
get up and go."
"In the city that I moved into
it wasn't something that was
welcomed as conversation -
violence amongst women - a lot
of women felt that women who
turned women into the police
were traitors, a lot of women
really focussed on the fact
that society views lesbian
relationships, some of society,
views lesbian relationships as
dysfunctional and this would
just add to their view of that.
It was my reality and I wasn't
just hurt by it, I was feeling
some anger around it too.
Ya, eventually I did, I had to
travel quite far for it
geographically,
but I was able to find a group,
a six week support group for
lesbian women
which was really helpful, um, it
made a huge difference.
I ended up for safety reasons,
having to relocate anyway
but emotionally in terms of
self-esteem, it really helped."
"I was carrying a lot of pain
from the past, and I was still
drinking from time to time
and abusing other substances.
So I went to seek help, actually
I went to a treatment centre.
From there I met some other
people that were native and who
began to inform me about uh,
our culture and teachings, our
family, our values
Anishnawbe Health has been a
really great help they have
traditional counselors there,
uh, traditional healers and
elders that come through.
Not to mention all the other
people that they have,
that attend the ceremonies, and
all the people in the community.
It's a really good meeting point
and connection point
where you meet friends who then
become like an extended family."
"I had a fight with him the day
before and he was drinking
and I thought ok I'm leaving
this situation, I've had it now.
I guess tomorrow's gonna be the
day he goes out, I'm gonna go.
So I phoned the shelter and they
had space, and I came.
He went out with the boys and I
packed what I could and came
here.
That was a week and a day ago."
"One of my friends that I called
happened to come out with me one
night
and that night he, um, he just
pushed me.
Like, he threatened me and then
he pushed me and it was in front
of my friends.
And I felt really, really bad
that they saw that and I felt
that I had to do something
and I knew it wasn't right
anymore, I was scared out of my
mind.
No one likes to call the police,
because everyone thinks it'll
make it worse
and I thought it would make it
worse.
All I really wanted was a
restraining order and um.
I got more than that because of
my testimony and my friend's
testimony.
It wasn't necessarily what I
wanted because he was charged
and I was still scared,
that scared me more and my
friends were just like "no, ok,
you have to stop this somehow -
no one's asking you to, no one's
asking you to be a pioneer or
anything
people have stopped these
people,
why don't you want to stop it,
what is your self-worth," and
they threw it back at me.
I mean, as much as I thought
that it was the worst thing I
could do for me,
it was actually the best thing I
could do, I guess because I
stopped it."
"I need to remember myself and
how I was before and how I'm
gonna be.
If I stayed where I was I would
have never, It would just be
continuing and get worse."
"Two days later I started
talking about it I told a friend
I wanted to tell her what
happened to me.
And I realized that I needed to
break the cycle of abuse
by communicating what had
happened because up to that
point
I kept most of these things to
myself."
"Be true to yourself, the little
voice you have in your head,
listen to it. "
"I'm at the point where I tell
the truth to myself and I can
live with it
and I don't feel like I'm the
one to blame anymore for any of
this business,
that this is not something just
between us like what happens to
a lot of people."
"I am thankful too that I am
here.
I am very happy that I am in
Canada because in a shelter,
all people all workers they are
very cooperative, very helpful
and god bless them."
"I've had, uh, for the most part
healthy relationships since
then.
I did actually end up with
another abusive woman very
briefly
but I was able to recognize the
signs and got out very quickly.
I mean, because of what I
learned,
it didn't stop me from running
into someone who was abusive
again it just sort of,
I was just more aware of how to
handle myself and more informed
as to the choices that i had."
"Just sit in a group for abused
women and listen you know just
get some education on it,
you know, maybe you don't think
you're being abused when you
are."
"And I am happy and I know it
will make him more mad,
but I don't care because this is
my life and I have a right to
live it.
I have been tested time and time
again and I'm not going to let
anyone bring me down, not
anymore.
There's too much offered in
life, there's too many good
things I've been given
to just pass up because someone
tried to hurt me - there's no
reason.
Ya, so what if someone tried to
hurt you, it doesn't mean that
you can't fulfill your dreams.
It means that it just makes you
stronger and you realize that
you should fulfill your dreams."
The road to healing can be a
long one, but it doesn't have
to be lonely.
Finding support in choosing your
own path can help you
break the cycle of abuse and
begin healing.
No one deserves to be abused and
recognizing that is the first
step to building healthier
relationships.